# Goal

We want to generate x86_64 code directly into RAM, fast. We don't need to be
able to assemble any x86_64 instruction. I think a small and fairly regular
subset will suffice. This document chooses the subset and copies the necessary
data from reference manuals, noticing only 64-bit mode.


## Sources

[This](https://wiki.osdev.org/X86-64_Instruction_Encoding) looks like a good
overview.
[This](https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/) has encodings.
[This](http://ref.x86asm.net/coder64.html) has decodings, and often reveals the
patterns.
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64#Differences_between_AMD64_and_Intel_64) has history and some
compatibility notes.
[Intel's version](https://software.intel.com/sites/default/files/managed/39/c5/325462-sdm-vol-1-2abcd-3abcd.pdf)
[AMD's version](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/24594.pdf)


## Compatibility

The basic x86_64 instruction set is supported by essentially all x86 CPUs back
to Intel Sandy Bridge (2011) or newer; AMD Bulldozer (2011) or newer, and all
VIA CPUs from about 2011.

### Vector extensions.

We won't have a requirement to vectorise loops for quite some time, but vector
registers might be useful for copying bits of memory around and possibly as
spill slots.

I don't think we have any reason to generate different code for different CPUs;
we are not yet at that level of optimization. It's not much of a burden to
generate code that runs on the vast majority of recent x86-compatible CPUs,
back to 2014 or even earlier.

AVX is supported back to Intel Sandy Bridge (2011) or newer; AMD Bulldozer
(2011) or newer, and VIA CPUs since about 2015. There are still a few CPUs in
use that don't support AVX2. However, more importantly, none of Intel's low
power cores (Atom onwards) support AVX, and this appears to remain their policy
in 2020. I think we can't assume AVX.

By asking for SSE4 instead, we can support Intel's low-power CPUs since about
2014 (Atom Z3xxx). I think there are quite a few of those about, and they're
still appearing in new machines. SSE4 was introduced in dribs and drabs; all
modern cores support SSE4.1 and SSE4.2 but only AMD ever implemented SSE4a, I
think.

By asking for only SSSE3 we can be compatible back to 2008ish (the first Intel
Atoms and AMD Phenoms and Bobcats) but I doubt there are many still in use.

### CPU differences

Don't use these instructions, whose behaviour varies between CPUs:

 - 16-bit branch offsets.
 - Unaligned SSE stores (loads are fine).
 - CMPXCHG16B

### Obsolete

Don't use these, which might not be supported in newer CPUs and OSes:

 - x87
 - MMX
 - 3DNow
 - [XOP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XOP_instruction_set)



# Encoding concepts

The general format of an x86 instruction is the concatenation of up to six
pieces:

 - Legacy prefixes. The main one we need is `REX`. We need the operand-width
 prefix byte only to encode 16-bit stores. We need the `LOCK` prefix byte only
 for atomic operations.
 - Opcode. This is a string of 1 to 4 bytes.
 - `ModR/M`. This is one byte. It contains register numbers and provides some
 opcode bits.
 - `SIB`. This is one byte. It contains register numbers and a 2-bit shift.
 - Displacement. This is an address offset. It can be 1, 2, 4 or 8 bytes. I
 think we mainly want the 4-byte variant.
 - Immediate. This is a constant operand.  It can be 1, 2, 4 or 8 bytes. We
 mostly want the 4-byte variant. We want the 1-byte variant for shifts, and the
 8-byte variant for 64-bit `MOV`.

The opcode is always present. Depending on the opcode, the `ModR/M` byte might
be present. Depending on the `ModR/M` byte, the `SIB` byte might be present.
The `ModR/M` byte also determines the presence and size of the displacement,
whereas the opcode determines the presence and size of the immediate.


## Patterns

For each instruction we want to assemble, I suggest we view the `REX` byte, the
opcode bytes, and the `ModR/M` and `SIB` bytes as an indivisible string of 2 to
7 bytes, which I will call a "pattern". We can write a whole pattern into the
instruction buffer as a 64-bit integer (corrupting some following bytes). The
`REX` byte is always in byte 0 in the pattern, but the last two bytes could be
anywhere from byte 2 to byte 7.

If a displacement or immediate is required, I suggest we separately write it
into the instruction buffer as an integer.

### Naming patterns

Let's name the patterns with a string of the letters "ROMS" each representing
one byte (`REX`, opcode, `ModR/M`, `SIB`). The letter "O" can be repeated.
Please maintain this enumeration of the patterns we need:

 - OO
 - RO
 - ROM
 - ROOM
 - ...

Note that e.g. the ROM pattern can be used with `reg` as a source and `rm` as a
destination, or vice versa. Arguably these are different patterns, but I have
not so far given them different names.


## `REX`

I suggest we always assemble a
[`REX` prefix](https://wiki.osdev.org/X86-64_Instruction_Encoding#REX_prefix)
on instructions that mention a register. This gives access to registers 8 to 15
and to the registers `SPL`, `BPL`, `SIL` and `DIL` (which are aliases for the
low byte of `SP`, `BP`, `SI` and `DI` respectively). It also makes the encoding
of register numbers more regular, and explicitly specifies whether to use 32
bit or 64-bit arithmetic.

A few relevant instructions always use 64-bit operands, with or without a `REX`
prefix. They are `CALL`, `JMP`, `Jcc`, `PUSH` and `POP`. There is very little
downside to putting a `REX` prefix on these too, though it will only be useful
for instructions that mention a register.

The [encoding](https://wiki.osdev.org/X86-64_Instruction_Encoding#Encoding) is
the union of the following bitmasks:

 - 0x40 - always (identifies a `REX` prefix)
 - 0x08 - W (1 means 64-bit, 0 means default, usually 32-bit)
 - 0x04 - R (top bit of the register number whose bottom bits are in the `reg`
 field of the ModR/M byte)
 - 0x02 - X (top bit of the register number whose bottom bits are in the `index`
 field of the SIB byte)
 - 0x01 - B (top bit of the register number whose bottom bits are in the `rm`
 field of the ModR/M byte or the `base` field of the SIB byte)

An alternative to a `REX` prefix is a
[`VEX` prefix](https://wiki.osdev.org/X86-64_Instruction_Encoding#VEX.2FXOP_opcodes);
I think it requires AVX support, and I don't think we need it.


## opcode

There are several possible opcode encodings. We mostly only need 1-byte
opcodes. We need 2-byte opcodes for `Jcc`, `CMOVcc`, `MOVZX` and `MOVSX`. All
the 2-byte opcodes have the `0x0f` in the first byte.


## Operands

Instructions which only have one operand sometimes omit the `ModR/M` byte. The
bottom three bits of the register number are encoded in the `rd` field (bits 0,
1 and 2) of the opcode and the top bit in the `R` bit of the `REX` byte.

More often, one-operand instructions are encoded as two-operand instructions,
with the bits that would otherwise be used to encode `reg` used as an opcode
extension. A commonly used notation for identifying these cases is to write
"opcode/reg", where "opcode" is the opcode byte and "reg" is the `reg` value.

Two-operand instructions are generally encoded with the bottom three bits of
the register numbers in the `reg` and `rm` fields of the `ModR/M` byte, and the
top bit in the `R` and `B` bits of the `REX` byte.

The second operand (`B.rm`) of instructions with a `ModR/M` byte can
alternatively be a memory location. In all cases that I recommend using, the
effective address used for accessing memory is the sum of three components:

 - `base` or `rm` (a register)
 - `index` (a register) shifted left by `scale` (a 2-bit immediate constant)
 - `displacement` (an immediate constant)

`base`, `index` and `scale` all come from the `SIB` byte. If `index` is not
needed, the `SIB` byte can be omitted, in which case `rm` is used instead of
`base` and zero is used instead of `index`.

The detailed encoding follows.

### `ModR/M`

The presence of a
[`ModR/M`](https://wiki.osdev.org/X86-64_Instruction_Encoding#ModR.2FM) byte is
indicated by the opcode.

The `ModR/M` byte has three fields:

 - `rm` - bits 0, 1 and 2 - bottom three bits of the register number whose top
 bit is in `REX.B`
 - `reg` - bits 3, 4 and 5 - bottom three bits of the register number whose top
 bit is in `REX.R`
 - `mod` - bits 6 and 7 - interpreted as follows provided `rm` is not 100 (`SP`
 or `R12`):
   - 00 - I recommend we only use this for program-relative addressing, i.e.
     with `rm` being `101`. In this case, a 32-bit displacement is added to the
     address of the following instruction. The other cases are a bit irregular.
   - 01 - word at address `rm` plus an 8-bit displacement. Perhaps we don't
   need this.
   - 10 - word at address `rm` plus a 32-bit displacement.
   - 11 - the register `rm` itself.

Sometimes, the `reg` field is used as an opcode. When it is a register number,
it can be a source or a destination. `rm` can also be a source or a
destination.

### `SIB`

A `SIB` byte always follows a `ModR/M` byte, I think, because the presence of a
`SIB` byte is indicated by setting the `rm` field of the `ModR/M` byte to 100
(which would otherwise indicate `SP` or `R12`).

The `SIB` byte has three fields:

 - `base` - bits 0, 1 and 2 - bottom three bits of the register number whose
 top bit is in `REX.B`. Note that a `SIB` byte can only be present if the `m`
 field of `ModR/M` is not a register number; the `base` register number
 essentially replaces the missing `rm` register number.
 - `index` - bits 3, 4 and 5 - bottom three bits of the register number whose
 top bit is in `REX.X`.
 - `scale` - bits 6 and 7 - a 2-bit shift distance.

If `X.index` is 0.100 (`SP`), zero is used instead. This provides an
alternative encoding of `register + displacement` which is one byte longer than
the encoding without a `SIB` byte. The alternative encoding is more general,
because `base` (unlike `rm`) can be `SP` or `R12`.



# Registers

Theoretically we have 16 general purpose registers available. In practice we
have somewhere between 11 and 14, because:

 - `SP` and `R12` cannot be used in the `rm` field of the `ModR/M` byte,
 because the bit pattern 100 is used to indicate the presence of a `SIB` byte.
 Moreover, `SP` cannot be used as the `index` field of a `SIB` byte, because
 the bit pattern 100 is used to indicate a zero index.
 - `A` and `D` have special roles in some instructions, e.g. long
 multiplication, and `C` has a special role for shifting by a computed amount.
 These might be a good choice for temporary workspace registers, or
 alternatively we can teach our register allocator the constraints.

## Fixed registers

Mijit needs a few "ambient" values which could compete for register space:

 - We need a stack pointer. I suggest we use `SP` as it has special powers.
 - We need to reserve a register to point to the read/writable data block. I
 suggest we use `R12`.
 - We need a frame pointer. I suggest we store it in memory, maybe at some
 offset in the data block.

Virtual machine registers, including `PC` and `IR`, are not treated specially
by Mijit.

## `BP` and `R13` are not special

If the `mod` field of a `ModR/M` byte is 00, then `BP` and `R13` cannot be used
in certain positions, because the bit pattern 101 is used variously to indicate
program-relative addressing or a zero `base` value. However, `BP` and `R13`
behave exactly the same as any other register provided we avoid that `mod`
value, which I recommend we do.

## Byte registers

There is an alias for byte 0 of each register. For example, `AL` is the bottom
byte of `A`. I'm not sure if we ever need these. There are alternative ways of
loading and storing single bytes, and we don't need 8-bit arithmetic.

We will never need the registers `AH`, `CH`, `BH` or `DH` (which are aliases
for byte 1 of the `A`, `C`, `B` and `D` registers).

## Encoding

Registers have 4-bit codes. The top bit goes in the `REX` prefix and the bottom
3 bits typically go in the `ModR/M` byte or in the `SIB` byte. The numbering is
as follows:

```
Number      0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   A   B   C   D   E   F
Register    A   C   D   B   SP  BP  SI  DI  R8  R9R 10  R11 R12 R13 R14 R15
```

### Masks

I suggest that for each register we construct a 64-bit *register mask* that
includes the register number in all bit positions in which it might be needed.
Parts of register numbers appear in various bytes, each of which may be in
various positions:

 - The `REX` byte contains the top bit of three register numbers.
 - The opcode bytes (only the first?) can contain the bottom three bits of a
 register number: `rd` in bits 0, 1 and 2.
 - The `ModR/M` byte can contain the bottom three bits of two register numbers:
 `rm` in bits 0, 1 and 2, and `reg` in bits 3, 4 and 5.
 - The `sib` byte can contain the bottom three bits of two register numbers:
 `base` in bits 0, 1 and 2, and `index` in bits 3, 4 and 5.

Here are the register masks for register numbers 1, 2, 4 and 8, which can be
ORed together to obtain all the other register masks:

```
1 - 0x09090909090900
2 - 0x12121212121200
4 - 0x24242424242400
8 - 0x00000000000007
```

For each pattern, we must define up to three *field masks*, corresponding to
the three register numbers that can be mentioned in a single x86 instruction.
ANDing a field mask with a register mask leaves the register number only in the
required field. For example, here are the field masks for the "RO", "ROM",
"ROMS" and "ROOMS" patterns:

```
pattern     RO          ROM         ROMS        ROOMS
reg         N/A         0x380004    0x00380004  0x0038000004
index       N/A         N/A         0x38000002  0x3800000002
rd/rm/base  0x0701      0x070001    0x00070001  0x0700000001
```



# Recommended instructions

## Move

A RISC instructions set would have separate load, store and move instructions,
but x86 covers all three cases with move instructions.

```
Pattern Mask        Dest    Source  Meaning
ROM     0xC08940    rm      reg     Move register to register
ROM     0x808940    rm      reg     Store register in memory (disp32)
ROM     0xC08B40    reg     rm      Move register to register
ROM     0x808B40    reg     rm      Load register from memory (disp32)
ROM     0xC0C740    rm      imm32   Move constant to register (imm32)
ROM     0x80C740    rm      imm32   Move constant to memory (disp32 imm32)
RO      0xB840      rd      imm32   Move constant to register (imm32)
```

Opcode bytes 0x89 and 0x8B can both be used to move from a register to a
register; there doesn't seem to be much to choose between them.

For opcode 0xC7 (move constant to register or memory), the `reg` field is
unused, and must be zero.

Opcode byte 0xB8 (really 0xB8 to 0xBF) is unusual, in that the destination
register is part of the opcode byte. The 64-bit version of this instruction has
an 8-byte immediate constant; I think it is the only such opcode.

For 64-bit versions, set the `REX.W` bit. Except for opcode 0xB8, the
displacements and immediates remain 4 bytes long (sign extended).


## Binary arithmetic

Add instructions are encoded as follows:

```
Pattern Mask        Dest    Source  Meaning
ROM     0xC08140    rm      imm32   Add constant to register (imm32)
ROM     0x808140    rm      imm32   Add constant to memory (disp32 imm32)
ROM     0xC00140    rm      reg     Add register to register
ROM     0x800140    rm      reg     Add register to memory (disp32)
ROM     0xC00340    reg     rm      Add register to register
ROM     0x800340    reg     rm      Add memory to register (disp32)
```

Opcode bytes 0x01 and 0x03 can both be used to add a register to a register;
there doesn't seem to be much to choose between them.

For 64-bit versions, set the `REX.W` bit. The displacements and the immediates
remain 4 bytes long (sign extended).

Other binary arithmetic instructions follow the same basic pattern. It suffices
to give, for each version of each arithmetic operation, the value of the opcode
byte (byte 1 of the pattern) and, in some cases, the opcode extension in the
`reg` field. In general, the following versions exist:

 - Combine a signed immediate constant with `rm`, and write `rm`.
 - Combine `reg` with `rm` and write `rm`.
 - Combine `rm` with `reg` and write `reg`.

```
Operation   ADD     OR      AND     SUB     XOR     CMP
const to rm 0x81/0  0x81/1  0x81/4  0x81/5  0x81/6  0x81/7
reg to rm   0x01    0x09    0x21    0x29    0x31    0x39
rm to reg   0x03    0x0B    0x23    0x2B    0x33    0x3B
```

Note that opcode byte 0x81 has multiple meanings, disambiguated by a number
after a "/". I think this must mean that the `reg` field of the `ModR/M` byte
is used as an opcode extension, i.e. `reg` must be set to the number after the
"/". I note also that the number after the "/" in the opcode for the version
with an immediate constant matches bits 3, 4 and 5 of the opcode for the other
two versions.

The `CMP` instruction does the same as `SUB` but only sets the processor status
flags, leaving the destination register unmodified. Note that the carry flag is
*set* to indicate a borrow; this convention differs from other architectures.

Addition can also be done using the `LEA` instruction, which allows a
destination register number to be specified in addition to two operand register
numbers, but which does not allow an operand to be in memory. This might be
useful later, as an optimization, but for now let's use a preceding move
instruction if necessary.


## Shifts

Rotate left instructions are encoded as follows:

```
Pattern Mask        Dest    Source  Meaning
ROM     0xC0C140    rm      imm8    Rotate register left by constant (imm8)
ROM     0x80C140    rm      imm8    Rotate memory left by constant (imm8)
ROM     0xC0D340    rm      C       Rotate register left by register
ROM     0x80D340    rm      C       Rotate memory left by register
```

The shift amount can be a 1-byte constant, or it can be the value of the C
register. Only the bottom 5 bits of the shift amount are used; the other bits
are masked to zero.

For 64-bit versions, set the `REX.W` bit. Only the bottom 6 bits of the shift
amount are used.

Note that if the shift amount cannot be in any register but C; this is an
irregularity in the instruction set.

Other shift operations follow the same basic pattern.  It suffices to give, for
each version of each shift operation, the value of the opcode byte (byte 1 of
the pattern) and the opcode extension in the `reg` field.

```
Operation   ROL     ROR     SAL/SHL SHR     SAR
rm by const 0xC1/0  0xC1/1  0xC1/4  0xC1/5  0xC1/7
rm by C     0xD3/0  0xD3/1  0xD3/4  0xD3/5  0xD3/7
```

Shifts can also be done using the `LEA` instruction, which allows a destination
register number to be specified in addition to a source operand register
number. The shift amount must be constant, and must be 0, 1, 2 or 3. This might
be useful later, as an optimization, but for now let's use a preceding move
instruction if necessary.


## Conditional branch

The `JO` and `JNO` instructions are encoded as follows:

```
Pattern Mask    Target  Meaning
OO      0x800F  imm32   Add a constant to RIP if the overflow flag is set
OO      0x810F  imm32   Add a constant to RIP if the overflow flag is clear
```

Do not add a `REX` prefix. It is redundant.

Other conditional branch instructions follow the same basic pattern. It
suffices to give bits 1, 2 and 3 of the opcode; bit 0 always inverts the
condition.

```
Condition   Nibble  Meaning
O           0       Overflow flag is set
B = C = NAE 2       ULT: carry/borrow flag is set
Z           4       EQ: zero flag is set
BE = NA     6       ULE carry or zero is set
S           8       Sign flag is set
P           A       Parity flag is set
L = NGE     C       LT: Sign and overflow differ
LE = NG     E       LE: Sign and overflow differ, or zero
```


## JMP, CALL and RET

````
Pattern Mask        Target  Meaning
RO      0xE940      imm32   Add a constant to RIP (i.e. direct jump) (imm32)
ROM     0xE0FF40    rm      Set RIP to register (i.e. indirect jump)
ROM     0xA0FF40    rm      Set RIP to memory (i.e. indirect jump) (disp32)
RO      0xE840      imm32   Push RIP then JMP imm  (i.e. direct call) (imm32)
ROM     0xD0FF40    rm      Push RIP then JMP reg (i.e. indirect call)
ROM     0xB0FF40    rm      Push RIP then JMP mem (i.e. indirect call) (disp32)
RO      0xC340              Pop RIP.
````

For opcodes `0xC3`, `0xE8` and `0xE9`, the `REX` prefix is pointless, but I
have included it.

Do not set the `REX.W` prefix. It changes the meaning of opcodes `0xFF/2` and
`0xFF/4`.

### Calling conventions

According to
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#x86-64_calling_conventions)
there are two main 64-bit calling conventions in use. I'm not sure how much to
trust Wikipedia.

Linux uses the System V AMD64 ABI:

 - Arguments:
   - The first six integer or pointer arguments are passed in `RDI`, `RSI`,
   `RDX`, `RCX`, `R8` and `R9`.
   - The first eight floating-point arguments are passed in `XMM0` to `XMM7`.
   - Additional arguments are pushed on the stack, rightmost first.
 - The return address is pushed immediately after the arguments.
 - The 128 bytes just beyond (below) SP can be used and "will not be clobbered
 by any signal or interrupt handlers". If you need more space, adjust SP.
 - Return value:
   - If the return value is up to two integer or pointer values, they are
   returned in RAX and RDX.
   - If the return value is up to two floating-point values, they are
   returned in XMM0 and XMM1.
   - Otherwise, the return value is stored in caller-allocated memory whose
   address is passed as an extra (first) argument.
 - Registers RBX, RBP and R12 to R15 are callee-saves, and I guess RSP counts
 as callee-saves too; all other registers (i.e. R10, R11 and unused argument
 and return registers) are caller-saves.

The Microsoft calling convention is different. It uses different registers, and
different numbers of registers. It replaces structs with their address. It
pushes four unused words between the arguments and the return address. As far
as I can see, there is no subset of C function signatures for which the calling
conventions are compatible, except for functions with no arguments and up to
one integer return value.


## PUSH and POP

```
Pattern Mask        Operand Meaning
ROM     0x86FF40    rm      Push a value from memory
RO      0x5040      rd      Push a register
RO      0x6840      imm32   Push a constant (imm32)
ROM     0x808F40    rm      Pop a value into memory
RO      0x5840      rd      Pop a register
```

For opcode `0x68`, the `REX` prefix is pointless, but I have included it.

In 64-bit mode, there are no 32-bit pushes or pops, and `REX.W` is ignored
([this page](https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/push) is wrong). Immediate
constants are 32-bit, and are sign-extended.

"Push" means subtract 8 from SP, then store the source value at SP. If pushing
SP, it is read before it is decremented.

"Pop" means load the destination value from SP then add 8 to SP. If popping SP,
it is written after it is incremented.

If using SP as a base address for specifying a memory location, RTFM.


## Rare operations

### Narrow data

The "traditional" way of encoding 8-bit memory accesses is to use the 8-bit
variant of the opcode (most operations have one). The traditional way to encode
16-bit memory accesses is to prepend a prefix byte of `0x66`. These encodings
affect the width used for arithmetic, which we don't want, and preserve the
upper bits of the destination register, which we also don't want. I suggest
using this encoding only for store instructions.

Instead, use the `MOVZX` and `MOVSX` instructions are available for loading 8-
and 16-bit words (two opcodes each). The `MOVSX` instructions do sign
extension. There is also a `MOVSXD` instruction for sign-extending a 32-bit
word.

```
Pattern Mask        Dest    Source  Meaning
FIXME: Missing registers in the next two instructions.
ROM     0x808840    rm      reg     Store 8 bits to memory (disp32)
ROM     0x808940    rm      reg     Store 16 or 32 bits to memory (disp32)
ROOM    0xC0B60F40  reg     rm      Zero-extend 8 bits from register
ROOM    0x80B60F40  reg     rm      Zero-extend 8 bits from memory (disp32)
ROOM    0xC0B70F40  reg     rm      Zero-extend 16 bits from register
ROOM    0x80B70F40  reg     rm      Zero-extend 16 bits from memory (disp32)
ROM     0xC08B40    reg     rm      Zero-extend 32 bits from register
ROM     0x808B40    reg     rm      Zero-extend 32 bits from memory (disp32)
ROOM    0xC0BE0F40  reg     rm      Sign-extend 8 bits from register
ROOM    0x80BE0F40  reg     rm      Sign-extend 8 bits from memory (disp32)
ROOM    0xC0BF0F40  reg     rm      Sign-extend 16 bits from register
ROOM    0x80BF0F40  reg     rm      Sign-extend 16 bits from memory (disp32)
ROM     0xC06348    reg     rm      Sign-extend 32 bits from register
ROM     0x806348    reg     rm      Sign-extend 32 bits from memory (disp32)
```

To store 16 bits to memory, assemble an operand-width prefix byte (`0x66`)
before the instruction.

For loads into 64-bit registers, set the `REX.W` bit. This only affects the
width of the destination register. The displacements remain 4 bytes long (sign
extended).

Zero-extending a 32-bit value to 64 bits is equivalent to a 32-bit move
instruction (`0x8B`), because 32-bit instructions clear the upper 32 bits of
the destination register. The `REX.W` bit must be clear for this to work.

In contrast, sign-extending a 32-bit value to 64 bits requires its own opcode
(`0x63`). The `REX.W` bit must be set for this to work.

### Atomic operations

I anticipate wanting atomic operations for updating reference counts in Welly.

The
[`LOCK` prefix](https://wiki.osdev.org/X86-64_Instruction_Encoding#LOCK_prefix)
can be put on read-modify-write instructions to make them atomic. I suggest we
special-case the only cases we need (adding or subtracting a constant from a
word in memory) and do not bother to generalise everything else.

```
LOCK    0xF0
```
